# Wisconsin Employment and Salary Visualization

## Premise
The map of Wisconsin illustrates how counties range from high income (example: Waukesha County) to low income (example: Ashland County). The location of cities certainly influences this distribution. In order to understand what causes some areas to be more or less affluent than others, it's helpful to look at the distribution of occupations within regions as well as how salaries of those occupations vary between regions. Different Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) have different focuses with regards to industry, and this can influence the median salary of the surrounding counties. Another influencing factor on salaries is the size of an MSA. MSAs that encompass more people tend to have higher salaries. 

## Data

The median income by county data came from the US Census 'American FactFinder' at http://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml. The geojson file for county boundaries from https://www.census.gov/geo/maps-data/data/cbf/cbf_counties.html. The occupational salary data by MSA comes from the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development at http://worknet.wisconsin.gov/worknet/downloads.aspx?menuselection=da&pgm=OES. I used http://www.gpsvisualizer.com/geocoder/ in order to get the coordinates of each MSA.

## Process

The cloropleth visualization showing median household salary for Wisconsin counties was created in an earlier project. I manipulated the geojson file in sublime text to only include WI counties. I transformed the census data for Wisconsin counties to only include median household salary and made sure the county names matched the geojson file.

The inspiration for the rest of the visualization came from looking at the locations of higher and lower income counties and thinking, "It would be really nice if there were cities and other relevant statistics visualized here to provide some context". I was hoping to find two things: city data and county data. I wasn't able to find employment data for individual counties in a format that wasn't pdf, so I settled for the Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) employment data provided by the Wisconsin Department of Workforce Development. This was less than ideal since I really wanted to show what went into Waukesha Counties median salary being so much higher than neighboring Milwaukee county (this is relevant to me since I grew up in this area). However, the MSAs encompass multiple counties and don't show this differentiation. 

I transformed the MSA data by deleting columns and adding a column for occupation abbrevations (this was necessary for the pie chart). The MSA data included multiple levels of aggregation regarding occupation statistics. The occupation groups that were ultimately shown in the visualization were the major occupation groupings, while the data included statistics broken down by more specific occupations. I removed specific occupations so that only major occupation groupings were left for the visualization. In order to get the MSA value into visualization, I used python to turn the data I was interested into JSON format.

My EDA process was about primarily confirming by hypothesis that the distribution of occupation salaries and occupation employment numbers different by MSA. Therefore, I chose a subset of possible MSA graphs to compare these distributions. I was originally going to include the median individual salaries for each MSA (which is the other thing I created an EDA visualization for), but I decided this would be too confusing next to the median household salaries of the counties.

I chose the light to dark blue aspect of the Wisconsin county cloropleth since it is an easy to interpret illustration of the difference Wisconsin counties. I included cities and their locations to provide context about where urban centers are. The yellow stands out from the surrounding blue. I encoded total employment into the radius of the yellow circles in order to differentitate the size of different urban areas. I included three MSAs that are neighboring but not actually in WI because they help provide context for comparison (not to mention they directly and indirectly influence the WI economy). I chose a bar graph for median salary by occupation because it very clearly shows differences in salary as well as occupation salary rankings between MSAs. I deliberately kept the x axis static to show the differences. The pie chart for employment amounts by occupation was chosen to easily see which occupations are more prevalent within each MSA.

The interactive element allows the user to focus on one county or MSA at a time without getting overwhelmed by information. The hover aspect requires less working than clicking. As a result of the transitions, one can easily see the differences in employment between two different MSAs.
